In this lesson, we'll recreate the home page of the sample site using the 2022 theme, you create the
three blog posts with their featured images and learn about the WordPress blocks available by default,
as well as block patterns included in the theme and available at WordPress.org.
By the end of this video, you'll understand how the Block Editor is used for creating content and how
block patterns are pre-designed sets of blocks that you can use in the design process.
First, let's deal with this homepage.
All they've got to do is create three new blog posts with this content.
And I can see that the header will look the same except for the menu item, of course, and then the
footer is exactly the same.
And so let's go back.
Go ahead.
And here's how I would attack this task.
You know, I've got the home page open in one tab and I've got the dashboard open in a second tab and
I have all the resources I need.
I can grab the text of each blog post from here and I can grab the images from the media library.
And so as we go back to here, what I'll do is go posts, all posts, and let's just take a look at
what we have here.
First thing I might do is just put the Hello World post in the trash and add a new post, and I could
see this is the post editing screen, and there's a few things here that I could show you.
This is really unchanged between a block based theme and and a non block based theme for full site editing.
And when we go to twenty two here, what I'm going to do the demo site is just control C to copy the
title and I'll add the title right there.
And now that I have that in here, I can click Save Draft if I want to.
And you know, if I click Preview, what that'll do is allow me to preview it for desktop or for tablet
or for mobile, because we always want to make sure that the sites we design are mobile responsive.
But you could say preview in a new tab and you'll be you'll remember I just clicked save as a draft,
and so it doesn't show the real URL.
It shows this little tag after the URL.
It's just preview equals true.
And so that's what this post is looking like so far.
You'll remember the the comments section.
And of course, there's no content here yet, so I'm just going to close that tab.
And as we go in here, just let me show you around before we bring all the content in.
First off, over here on the left side, you could click these three little lines and that's the list
view of all the blocks that you might have inside of your post itself.
So that's just something to be aware of.
And then all the content that we put in WordPress sites is housed in individual blocks, and that makes
it very modular so that you can, you know, put your content in there and then you can rearrange the
blocks into different order and you can easily export blocks to put them on different pages.
You can create reusable blocks so that you can easily bring a design that you made into other pages
or posts of the website.
But wherever there's a plus button, it basically does the same thing.
Add a block.
And over here, this plus side is going to toggle again another toolbar over here, which is the block
insert here.
And so if I do that now, you can see that, you know, here inside of the content area, I could add
any of these types of blocks and you could see when I roll over any of them with the mouse.
It shows me a preview of what the block might look like over here on the right hand side.
And so these are all the default blocks they're categorized.
There's text blocks here, just a paragraph, you know, a list.
There's a bulleted list.
There's also a numerical list within there, too.
There's a quotation, a code block if you want to put code that will execute on the page tables, a
pull quote.
Things like that.
So in any case, here's media blocks.
Design blocks are ones that allow you to take other blocks and put them in a certain configuration,
right?
So you could.
What you could do is you could use a roadblock as kind of a placeholder or a container, and then you
can put columns inside of that container and then inside of each column.
You would then put a different type of block like in image.
And so those are design blocks and then widgets do certain things.
So a list of your categories a calendar, some custom HTML.
If you want to paste something you know, like a Google map, embed code or or an embed code from YouTube
or something like that.
The the theme section shows a bunch of different types of blocks.
Like if you were going to use, if you were going to put, say, a grid of blog posts, you might use
the query loop, which goes and gets data in a loop.
It'll go get a blog post and then it'll get the next blog post and then the next blog post and can figure
out how you like.
So you can start to see the power of these blocks and how they work.
Now, I mentioned embedding a YouTube embed code using the custom HTML block, but there's also all
of these embeds over here, so you could just embed it by simply pasting the URL of a YouTube video
and putting it in there and all these types of embed blocks down here.
But not only that, there's patterns and patterns are really the the the the real power in a block based
theme is that that theme can include a whole bunch of design patterns that you can use that match the
design that the theme has.
And so in this 20 22 theme under patterns, you can start to see this is the featured category.
And as I go down here, you can see that there's all kinds of different sections that are more complex
layouts that you can just easily bring in.
You know, an image with a caption, If I just click that, that brings in that image with a caption,
I can replace the image.
It has a nice color.
And you can see that that's easily usable.
And so then when you bring in a block and when a block exists in the content of a page, you can see
that it has a control bar here up at the top and so I can click options.
And then there's a few options for this block.
For now, this is a group of blocks.
That's why it's calling it a group.
And so because it was a block pattern is basically a group of blocks.
So I'm going to click Remove Group so that we're back to where we were.
So not only are these patterns visible in a row?
Yes.
Excuse me, in a column down here, they're a little bit easier to see if you click Explore, that opens
up a window where you can just see them a little bit easier to see.
Not such a long list.
And then that dropdown, where it said, featured these are all the featured block patterns or groups
of blocks.
But there's footers.
Oh, OK, so now you're starting to see if you want a different footer.
You can just use one of the four footers supplied by the theme that matches everything.
And so and headers as well.
You can see that.
Do you recognize this header from one of the pages in the demo?
I do.
And you can see that there's all kinds of different headers included in the 2022 two theme.
The query block, like I said, it does things like brings in featured posts or a grid of posts and
some large title offset.
There's pages.
These are complete pages that are block patterns.
And so if you look about look at these and they have a little description title at the bottom there
an about page with a large image and buttons, for example, a page layout with image and text image,
a page layout with image, text and video.
Does this one look a little bit familiar to you?
That was the film page, wasn't it?
In the other in the demo site?
And so you can see that there's the real power here of a block based theme is that you can customize
and design everything without any code or using any special CSC to change things.
And you can make a completely unique site, but matching the global elements of typography, colors
and styles that the theme has within it.
And so this 20 22 theme has a lot of hidden features in these block patterns.
There's column layouts, galleries for imagery.
There's a whole series of different types of text block patterns.
And so I'm just going to close this modal window here that gives you an idea of the power of block patterns
and what we're talking about patterns just quickly.
Let's go back to WordPress dot org and there's a new button here called Patterns.
And now these are patterns not from the 2020 to theme necessarily, but from not even connected with
any theme at all.
These are user submitted and volunteers submitted patterns that are on the WordPress dot org website.
And so, for example, you know, to offset images with a description.
If you were to click that, you could see a bigger, bigger version, your version of it, and you can
drag these to see what that looks like at different screen sizes.
You could see the two different images stack each other when you get to smaller, smaller screens.
But the beauty of the block patterns and the pattern library here is that you can just click copy pattern,
and now you can just paste it into a WordPress post or a page.
Suppose I wanted to just go here into this post and just move the cursor right there and click Control
V and paste that.
I have that exact block pattern now in my website, including the images, and I can publish it.
And so there's real power in these block patterns.
There's so shareable.
And not only can they be, are they included in the WordPress.org repository that's just going to keep
growing with more and more patterns available.
But the real power, like I said, is having these patterns available to you, you know, inside of
your website supplied by the theme that you're using.
And so, OK, let's get back to designing now.
Now that you know about that, let's put the image that needs to go in here.
So at this blog post this image right here, I know that this image is a particular kind of image.
Now I'm looking at the homepage here that has three blog posts, and because this is an archive of three
blog posts, I know that these images are what's called featured images.
So if you click it, it goes and opens the blog post itself.
And I'll bet that if I were to log in to this website and look at this post, this image doesn't actually
exist within the content area of the post here, but instead under post over on the right hand side.
Here it's under featured image and you can click set featured image.
Now this control bar over here for either the post.
Or the block that you're looking at over here, this paragraph block potentially is controlled up here
with the gear icon.
I can close it and get a full screen layout of what the the site will look like.
Or I can just open that up.
Usually, I'll have it open all the time.
So if I click set featured image, I can go to the media library and let's put the right image in.
So for an area of hawks, it's this red bird with the tail.
That's right there.
And then I can just say set featured image and it's uploading it there, and then I can either click
save, draft or publish.
And now this will give you by default, it'll say, Oh, are you sure you want to publish?
It'll say, We've done a double.
Check your settings, OK, the visibility's public.
Publish it now or do you want it's scheduled, et cetera.
Or do you want to assign a category where this kind of category?
Yeah, these were assigned to category birds.
Goldfinch and Sparrow were tags I can see by looking at the URL at the bottom there and then notes was
the category.
We don't have to do that right now, but I could assign a category.
And of course, uncategorized is the default.
But let's go ahead and create a new category called notes if we're really going to match this demo site.
That would be the proper way to do it.
And sure, I could add some tags birds, goldfinch and sparrow.
Birds, you can separate them by karma.
I just hit a karma.
And that's what put it kind of as a little tag with an X button to remove it.
Goldfinch.
Oops!
Goldfinch comma.
Woops.
Well, something happened there.
Let's cancel that.
Let's look in here, OK, birds.
Goldfinch comma, spero, comma.
All right, so now do I have that category of notes yet now I can click publish and here's the checks
again.
I usually uncheck this box here.
Always show the pre-published checks.
That's what we're looking at, the pre-published checks here.
So I'm going to uncheck that and click publish.
And then that's what this looks like.
There's one thing we're missing, though, which is the the text content, text content of this blog
post.
So I'm just going to click there and hit paste.
Now, if you just if you're like in a block, a text, a paragraph block, for example, and you hit
enter.
If you just start typing words that's going to create a paragraph block for you.
So this now is a separate paragraph block from this above paragraph block.
And here are the controls for that block.
And so you can actually change the type of block.
I can transform it into any of these.
Suppose I wanted a heading or something else that I could transform the paragraph block.
I could use it there.
If I wanted this to be a link, for example, I could click Link right here and I could, you know?
Put the link in there and hit enter or click here, and then that's showing as a link and it'll be a
clickable link from the website.
If I wanted that link to open in a new tab, I could use.
I could use you open that again.
I could use this little toggle.
Open that link in a new tab if I want to.
There are some, some other things you could do with the text like bold, italic.
You know, all these types of things here.
So let's go ahead.
And yeah, if I highlight paragraph, oops, if I had that paragraph again or even just click it, I
could and I click the link, I could unlink it if I want to or edit that.
In any case, if I just go ahead and highlight it and hit the back button, I've gotten rid of that.
This is the contents of the post over here.
So I'm just going to click Update over here.
It gives me a message post updated now.
If I click View Post now, it's going to open the post in the same tab as I have my dashboard.
So I generally don't do that very much.
I'll often go over to another tab and then take a look, refresh the page and see what I've got there.
And so this is what the blog post itself looks like.
Nice, you know, it's got that featured image and there's the tags and there, and this is the author
right here.
And this is the nickname of the author and how the name of that author is displayed.
And so if I wanted to hit back real quick just to get back to the dashboard and then if when you're
in any editing page for a post or a page, you can hit this arrow at the top left to get back to the
real dashboard.
You can see now I'm on the Post's page.
And there's my post right there.
The author shows again that that nickname.
Now I'm going to go ahead and either under users and profile or in the admin bar, you can go under
your username up here and click Edit Profile.
Either place goes down in it.
It shows nickname required and you can display name publicly as now the only thing available is the
username that I used.
But if I wanted to, which I usually do, I'll put my first and last name in there.
Now that gives me the option to use my real name as the public name in there, and then I can go to
the bottom and click Update profile.
So now if I look at this blog post, let's go ahead and refresh the page.
Oops.
Something happened there.
Sample page, I was on the sample page, so if I go to home, something's wrong here.
It must have been from when I went and edited the site itself because there's an empty template here.
Let's do a little troubleshooting.
Go back to the editor.
Because I have front page enabled, I remember when I clicked add.
Yeah, let's go ahead and let's see.
Hmm.
I'm going to get back.
I want to look at the templates, so I added this template here.
I don't I want to delete that front page template because it was conflicting with the template I have
called home.
And so now that I did that, the front page was deleted.
If I look at home now, that's showing correctly as I'm in the template editor here.
So then I can go back to the dashboard and as I go back here, I can just refresh the page.
And that's going to show the correct template.
And so now great, I have one of the three blog posts, and so I'll pass the video here and add the
next two, and you should do the same.